<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>X</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">X</h2>
			<p>His remarks on the subject of Miss Marple as we left the house were far from complimentary.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI really believe that wizened-up old maid thinks she knows everything there is to know. And hardly been out of this village all her life. Preposterous. What can she know of life?‚Äù</p>
			<p>I said mildly that though doubtless Miss Marple knew next to nothing of Life with a capital L, she knew practically everything that went on in <abbr>St.</abbr>¬ÝMary Mead.</p>
			<p>Melchett admitted that grudgingly. She was a valuable witness‚ÅÝ‚Äîparticularly valuable from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝProtheroe‚Äôs point of view.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI suppose there‚Äôs no doubt about what she says, eh?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIf Miss Marple says she had no pistol with her, you can take it for granted that it is so,‚Äù I said. ‚ÄúIf there was the least possibility of such a thing, Miss Marple would have been on to it like a knife.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat‚Äôs true enough. We‚Äôd better go and have a look at the studio.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The so-called studio was a mere rough shed with a skylight. There were no windows and the door was the only means of entrance or egress. Satisfied on this score, Melchett announced his intention of visiting the Vicarage with the inspector.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôm going to the police station now.‚Äù</p>
			<p>As I entered through the front door, a murmur of voices caught my ear. I opened the drawing-room door.</p>
			<p>On the sofa beside Griselda, conversing animatedly sat Miss Gladys Cram. Her legs, which were encased in particularly shiny pink stockings, were crossed, and I had every opportunity of observing that she wore pink striped silk knickers.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHullo, Len,‚Äù said Griselda.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúGood morning, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝClement,‚Äù said Miss Cram. ‚ÄúIsn‚Äôt the news about the colonel really too awful? Poor old gentleman.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMiss Cram,‚Äù said my wife, ‚Äúvery kindly came in to offer to help us with the Guides. We asked for helpers last Sunday, you remember.‚Äù</p>
			<p>I did remember, and I was convinced, and so, I knew from her tone, was Griselda, that the idea of enrolling herself among them would never have occurred to Miss Cram but for the exciting incident which had taken place at the Vicarage.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI was only just saying to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝClement,‚Äù went on Miss Cram, ‚Äúyou could have struck me all of a heap when I heard the news. A murder? I said. In this quiet one-horse village‚ÅÝ‚Äîfor quiet it is, you must admit‚ÅÝ‚Äînot so much as a picture house, and as for Talkies! And then when I heard it was Colonel Protheroe‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhy, I simply couldn‚Äôt believe it. He didn‚Äôt seem the kind, somehow, to get murdered.‚Äù</p>
			<p>I don‚Äôt know what Miss Cram considers are the necessary qualifications for being murdered. It has never struck me that the murdered belong to a special class, but doubtless she had some idea in her golden shingled head.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd so,‚Äù said Griselda, ‚ÄúMiss Cram came round to find out all about it.‚Äù</p>
			<p>I feared this plain speaking might offend the lady, but she merely flung her head back and laughed uproariously, showing every tooth she possessed.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat‚Äôs too bad. You‚Äôre a sharp one, aren‚Äôt you, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝClement? But it‚Äôs only natural, isn‚Äôt it, to want to hear the ins and outs of a case like this? And I‚Äôm sure I‚Äôm willing enough to help with the Guides in any way you like. Exciting, that‚Äôs what it is. I‚Äôve been stagnating for a bit of fun. I have, really I have. Not that my job isn‚Äôt a very good one, well paid, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝStone quite the gentleman in every way. But a girl wants a bit of life out of office hours, and except for you, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝClement, who is there in the place to talk to except a lot of old cats?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThere‚Äôs Lettice Protheroe,‚Äù I said.</p>
			<p>Gladys Cram tossed her head.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúShe‚Äôs too high and mighty for the likes of me. Fancies herself the country, and wouldn‚Äôt demean herself by noticing a girl who had to work for her living. Not but what I did hear her talking of earning her living herself. And who‚Äôd employ her, I should like to know? Why, she‚Äôd be fired in less than a week. Unless she went as one of those mannequins, all dressed up and sidling about. She could do that, I expect.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúShe‚Äôd make a very good mannequin,‚Äù said Griselda. ‚ÄúShe‚Äôs got such a lovely figure.‚Äù There‚Äôs nothing of the cat about Griselda. ‚ÄúWhen was she talking of earning her own living?‚Äù</p>
			<p>Miss Cram seemed momentarily discomfited, but recovered herself with her usual archness.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat would be telling, wouldn‚Äôt it?‚Äù she said. ‚ÄúBut she did say so. Things not very happy at home, I fancy. Catch me living at home with a stepmother. I wouldn‚Äôt sit down under it for a minute.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAh! but you‚Äôre so high spirited and independent,‚Äù said Griselda gravely, and I looked at her with suspicion.</p>
			<p>Miss Cram was clearly pleased.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat‚Äôs right. That‚Äôs me all over. Can be led, not driven. A palmist told me that not so very long ago. No. I‚Äôm not one to sit down and be bullied. And I‚Äôve made it clear all along to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝStone that I must have my regular times off. These scientific gentlemen, they think a girl‚Äôs a kind of machine‚ÅÝ‚Äîhalf the time they just don‚Äôt notice her or remember she‚Äôs there.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDo you find <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝStone pleasant to work with? It must be an interesting job if you are interested in archaeology.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOf course, I don‚Äôt know much about it,‚Äù confessed the girl. ‚ÄúIt still seems to me that digging up people that are dead and have been dead for hundreds of years isn‚Äôt‚ÅÝ‚Äîwell, it seems a bit nosy, doesn‚Äôt it? And there‚Äôs <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝStone so wrapped up in it all, that half the time he‚Äôd forget his meals if it wasn‚Äôt for me.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIs he at the barrow this morning?‚Äù asked Griselda.</p>
			<p>Miss Cram shook her head.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúA bit under the weather this morning,‚Äù she explained. ‚ÄúNot up to doing any work. That means a holiday for little Gladys.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôm sorry,‚Äù I said.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh! It‚Äôs nothing much. There‚Äôs not going to be a second death. But do tell me, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝClement, I hear you‚Äôve been with the police all morning. What do they think?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell,‚Äù I said slowly, ‚Äúthere is still a little‚ÅÝ‚Äîuncertainty.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAh!‚Äù cried Miss Cram. ‚ÄúThen they don‚Äôt think it is <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝLawrence Redding after all. So handsome, isn‚Äôt he? Just like a movie star. And such a nice smile when he says good morning to you. I really couldn‚Äôt believe my ears when I heard the police had arrested him. Still, one has always heard they‚Äôre very stupid‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe county police.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou can hardly blame them in this instance,‚Äù I said. ‚Äú<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝRedding came in and gave himself up.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat?‚Äù the girl was clearly dumbfounded. ‚ÄúWell‚ÅÝ‚Äîof all the poor fish! If I‚Äôd committed a murder, I wouldn‚Äôt go straight off and give myself up. I should have thought Lawrence Redding would have had more sense. To give in like that! What did he kill Protheroe for? Did he say? Was it just a quarrel?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt‚Äôs not absolutely certain that he did kill him,‚Äù I said.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut surely‚ÅÝ‚Äîif he says he has‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhy really, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝClement, he ought to know.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHe ought to, certainly,‚Äù I agreed. ‚ÄúBut the police are not satisfied with his story.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut why should he say he‚Äôd done it if he hasn‚Äôt?‚Äù</p>
			<p>That was a point on which I had no intention of enlightening Miss Cram. Instead I said rather vaguely:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI believe that in all prominent murder cases, the police receive numerous letters from people accusing themselves of the crime.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Miss Cram‚Äôs reception of this piece of information was:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThey must be chumps!‚Äù in a tone of wonder and scorn.</p>
			<p>She added: ‚ÄúI‚Äôd never do a thing like that.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôm sure you wouldn‚Äôt,‚Äù I said.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell,‚Äù she said with a sigh, ‚ÄúI suppose I must be trotting along.‚Äù She rose. ‚Äú<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝRedding accusing himself of the murder will be a bit of news for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝStone.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIs he interested?‚Äù asked Griselda.</p>
			<p>Miss Cram furrowed her brows perplexedly.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHe‚Äôs a queer one. You never can tell with him. All wrapped up in the past. He‚Äôd a hundred times rather look at a nasty old bronze knife out of those humps of ground than he would see the knife Crippen cut up his wife with, supposing he had a chance to.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell,‚Äù I said, ‚ÄúI must confess I agree with him.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Miss Cram‚Äôs eyes expressed incomprehension and slight contempt. Then, with reiterated goodbyes, she took her departure.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNot such a bad sort, really,‚Äù said Griselda, as the door closed behind her. ‚ÄúTerribly common, of course, but one of those big, bouncing, good-humoured girls that you can‚Äôt dislike. I wonder what really brought her here?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúCuriosity.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes, I suppose so. Now, Len, tell me all about it. I‚Äôm simply dying to hear.‚Äù</p>
			<p>I sat down and recited faithfully all the happenings of the morning, Griselda interpolating the narrative with little exclamations of surprise and interest.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSo it was Anne Lawrence was after all along! Not Lettice. How blind we‚Äôve all been! That must have been what old Miss Marple was hinting at yesterday. Don‚Äôt you think so?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes,‚Äù I said, averting my eyes.</p>
			<p>Mary entered.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThere‚Äôs a couple of men here‚ÅÝ‚Äîcome from a newspaper, so they say. Do you want to see them?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo,‚Äù I said, ‚Äúcertainly not. Refer them to Inspector Slack at the police station.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Mary nodded and turned away.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd when you‚Äôve got rid of them,‚Äù I said, ‚Äúcome back here. There‚Äôs something I want to ask you.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Mary nodded again.</p>
			<p>It was some few minutes before she returned.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHad a job getting rid of them,‚Äù she said. ‚ÄúPersistent. You never saw anything like it. Wouldn‚Äôt take no for an answer.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI expect we shall be a good deal troubled with them,‚Äù I said. ‚ÄúNow, Mary, what I want to ask you is this: Are you quite certain you didn‚Äôt hear the shot yesterday evening?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThe shot what killed him? No, of course I didn‚Äôt. If I had of done, I should have gone in to see what had happened.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes, but‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù I was remembering Miss Marple‚Äôs statement that she had heard a shot ‚Äúin the wood.‚Äù I changed the form of my question. ‚ÄúDid you hear any other shot‚ÅÝ‚Äîone down in the wood, for instance?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh! that.‚Äù The girl paused. ‚ÄúYes, now I come to think of it, I believe I did. Not a lot of shots, just one. Queer sort of bang it was.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúExactly,‚Äù I said. ‚ÄúNow what time was that?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúTime?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes, time.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI couldn‚Äôt say, I‚Äôm sure. Well after teatime. I do know that.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúCan‚Äôt you get a little nearer than that?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo, I can‚Äôt. I‚Äôve got my work to do, haven‚Äôt I? I can‚Äôt go on looking at clocks the whole time‚ÅÝ‚Äîand it wouldn‚Äôt be much good anyway‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe alarm loses a good three-quarters every day, and what with putting it on and one thing and another, I‚Äôm never exactly sure what time it is.‚Äù</p>
			<p>This perhaps explains why our meals are never punctual. They are sometimes too late and sometimes bewilderingly early.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWas it long before <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝRedding came?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo, it wasn‚Äôt long. Ten minutes‚ÅÝ‚Äîa quarter of an hour‚ÅÝ‚Äînot longer than that.‚Äù</p>
			<p>I nodded my head, satisfied.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIs that all?‚Äù said Mary. ‚ÄúBecause what I mean to say is, I‚Äôve got the joint in the oven and the pudding boiling over as likely as not.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat‚Äôs all right. You can go.‚Äù</p>
			<p>She left the room, and I turned to Griselda.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIs it quite out of the question to induce Mary to say sir or ma‚Äôam?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI have told her. She doesn‚Äôt remember. She‚Äôs just a raw girl, remember?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI am perfectly aware of that,‚Äù I said. ‚ÄúBut raw things do not necessarily remain raw forever. I feel a tinge of cooking might be induced in Mary.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, I don‚Äôt agree with you,‚Äù said Griselda. ‚ÄúYou know how little we can afford to pay a servant. If once we got her smartened up at all, she‚Äôd leave. Naturally. And get higher wages. But as long as Mary can‚Äôt cook and has those awful manners‚ÅÝ‚Äîwell, we‚Äôre safe, nobody else would have her.‚Äù</p>
			<p>I perceived that my wife‚Äôs methods of housekeeping were not so entirely haphazard as I had imagined. A certain amount of reasoning underlay them. Whether it was worth while having a maid at the price of her not being able to cook, and having a habit of throwing dishes and remarks at one with the same disconcerting abruptness, was a debatable matter.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd anyway,‚Äù continued Griselda, ‚Äúyou must make allowances for her manners being worse than usual just now. You can‚Äôt expect her to feel exactly sympathetic about Colonel Protheroe‚Äôs death when he jailed her young man.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDid he jail her young man?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes, for poaching. You know, that man, Archer. Mary has been walking out with him for two years.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI didn‚Äôt know that.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDarling Len, you never know anything.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt‚Äôs queer,‚Äù I said, ‚Äúthat everyone says the shot came from the woods.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI don‚Äôt think it‚Äôs queer at all,‚Äù said Griselda. ‚ÄúYou see, one so often hears shots in the wood. So naturally, when you do hear a shot, you just assume as a matter of course that it <em>is</em> in the wood. It probably just sounds a bit louder than usual. Of course, if one were in the next room, you‚Äôd realise that it was in the house, but from Mary‚Äôs kitchen with the window right the other side of the house, I don‚Äôt believe you‚Äôd ever think of such a thing.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The door opened again.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúColonel Melchett‚Äôs back,‚Äù said Mary. ‚ÄúAnd the police inspector with him, and they say they‚Äôd be glad if you‚Äôd join them. They‚Äôre in the study.‚Äù</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
