<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-31" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>XXXI</h2>
			<p>Colonel Melchett and I both stared at her.</p>
			<p>“A trap? What kind of a trap?”</p>
			<p>Miss Marple was a little diffident, but it was clear that she had a plan fully outlined.</p>
			<p>“Supposing <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Redding were to be rung up on the telephone and warned.” Colonel Melchett smiled. “ ‘All is discovered. Fly!’ That’s an old wheeze, Miss Marple. Not that it isn’t often successful! But I think in this case young Redding is too downy a bird to be caught that way.”</p>
			<p>“It would have to be something specific. I quite realize that,” said Miss Marple. “I would suggest⁠—this is just a mere suggestion⁠—that the warning should come from somebody who is known to have rather unusual views on these matters. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Haydock’s conversation would lead anyone to suppose that he might view such a thing as murder from an unusual angle. If he were to hint that somebody⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Sadler⁠—or one of her children⁠—had actually happened to see the transposing of the cachets⁠—well, of course, if <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Redding is an innocent man, that statement will mean nothing to him, but if he isn’t⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Well, he might just possibly do something foolish.”</p>
			<p>“And deliver himself into our hands. It’s possible. Very ingenious, Miss Marple. But will Haydock stand for it? As you say, his views⁠—”</p>
			<p>Miss Marple interrupted him brightly.</p>
			<p>“Oh, but that’s theory! So very different from practice, isn’t it? But anyway, here he is, so we can ask him.”</p>
			<p>Haydock was, I think, rather astonished to find Miss Marple with us. He looked tired and haggard.</p>
			<p>“It’s been a near thing,” he said. “A very near thing. But he’s going to pull through. It’s a doctor’s business to save his patient and I saved him, but I’d have been just as glad if I hadn’t pulled it off.”</p>
			<p>“You may think differently,” said Melchett, “when you have heard what we have to tell you.”</p>
			<p>And briefly and succinctly, he put Miss Marple’s theory of the crime before the doctor, ending up with her final suggestion.</p>
			<p>We were then privileged to see exactly what Miss Marple meant by the difference between theory and practice.</p>
			<p>Haydock’s views appeared to have undergone a complete transformation. He would, I think, have liked Lawrence Redding’s head on a charger. It was not, I imagine, the murder of Colonel Protheroe that so stirred his rancour.</p>
			<p>It was the assault on the unlucky Hawes.</p>
			<p>“The damned scoundrel,” said Haydock. “The damned scoundrel! That poor devil Hawes. He’s got a mother and a sister too. The stigma of being the mother and sister of a murderer would have rested on them for life, and think of their mental anguish. Of all the cowardly dastardly tricks!”</p>
			<p>For sheer primitive rage, commend me to a thorough-going humanitarian when you get him well roused.</p>
			<p>“If this thing’s true,” he said, “you can count on me. The fellow’s not fit to live. A defenceless chap like Hawes.”</p>
			<p>A lame dog of any kind can always count on Haydock’s sympathy.</p>
			<p>He was eagerly arranging details with Melchett when Miss Marple rose and I insisted on seeing her home.</p>
			<p>“It is most kind of you, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Clement,” said Miss Marple, as we walked down the deserted street. “Dear me, past twelve o’clock. I hope Raymond has gone to bed and not waited up.”</p>
			<p>“He should have accompanied you,” I said.</p>
			<p>“I didn’t let him know I was going,” said Miss Marple.</p>
			<p>I smiled suddenly as I remembered Raymond West’s subtle psychological analysis of the crime.</p>
			<p>“If your theory turns out to be the truth⁠—which I for one do not doubt for a minute,” I said, “you will have a very good score over your nephew.”</p>
			<p>Miss Marple smiled also⁠—an indulgent smile.</p>
			<p>“I remember a saying of my Great Aunt Fanny’s. I was sixteen at the time and thought it particularly foolish.”</p>
			<p>“Yes?” I inquired.</p>
			<p>“She used to say: ‘The young people think the old people are fools; but the old people <em>know</em> the young people are fools!’ ”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
