<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-24" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>XXIV</h2>
			<p>I returned to the Vicarage to find Hawes waiting for me in my study. He was pacing up and down nervously, and when I entered the room he started as though he had been shot.</p>
			<p>“You must excuse me,” he said, wiping his forehead. “My nerves are all to pieces lately.”</p>
			<p>“My dear fellow,” I said, “you positively must get away for a change. We shall have you breaking down altogether, and that will never do.”</p>
			<p>“I can’t desert my post. No, that is a thing I will never do.”</p>
			<p>“It’s not a case of desertion. You are ill. I’m sure Haydock would agree with me.”</p>
			<p>“Haydock⁠—Haydock. What kind of a doctor is he? An ignorant country practitioner.”</p>
			<p>“I think you’re unfair to him. He has always been considered a very able man in his profession.”</p>
			<p>“Oh! Perhaps. Yes, I dare say. But I don’t like him. However, that’s not what I came to say. I came to ask you if you would be kind enough to preach tonight instead of me. I⁠—I really do not feel equal to it.”</p>
			<p>“Why, certainly. I will take the service for you.”</p>
			<p>“No, no. I wish to take the service. I am perfectly fit. It is only the idea of getting up in the pulpit, of all those eyes staring at me⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>He shut his eyes and swallowed convulsively.</p>
			<p>It is clear to me that there is something very wrong indeed with Hawes. He seemed aware of my thoughts, for he opened his eyes and said quickly:</p>
			<p>“There is nothing really wrong with me. It is just these headaches⁠—these awful racking headaches. I wonder if you could let me have a glass of water.”</p>
			<p>“Certainly,” I said.</p>
			<p>I went and fetched it myself from the tap. Ringing bells is a profitless form of exercise in our house.</p>
			<p>I brought the water to him and he thanked me. He took from his pocket a small cardboard box, and opening it, extracted a rice paper capsule, which he swallowed with the aid of the water.</p>
			<p>“A headache powder,” he explained.</p>
			<p>I suddenly wondered whether Hawes might have become addicted to drugs. It would explain a great many of his peculiarities.</p>
			<p>“You don’t take too many, I hope,” I said.</p>
			<p>“No⁠—oh, no. Dr. Haydock warned me against that. But it is really wonderful. They bring instant relief.”</p>
			<p>Indeed he already seemed calmer and more composed.</p>
			<p>He stood up.</p>
			<p>“Then you will preach tonight? It’s very good of you, sir.”</p>
			<p>“Not at all. And I insist on taking the service too. Get along home and rest. No, I won’t have any argument. Not another word.”</p>
			<p>He thanked me again. Then he said, his eyes sliding past me to the window:</p>
			<p>“You⁠—have been up at Old Hall today, haven’t you, sir?”</p>
			<p>“Yes.”</p>
			<p>“Excuse me⁠—but were you sent for?”</p>
			<p>I looked at him in surprise, and he flushed.</p>
			<p>“I’m sorry, sir. I⁠—I just thought some new development might have arisen and that was why Mrs. Protheroe had sent for you.”</p>
			<p>I had not the faintest intention of satisfying Hawes’s curiosity.</p>
			<p>“She wanted to discuss the funeral arrangements and one or two other small matters with me,” I said.</p>
			<p>“Oh! That was all. I see.”</p>
			<p>I did not speak. He fidgeted from foot to foot, and finally said:</p>
			<p>“Mr. Redding came to see me last night. I⁠—I can’t imagine why.”</p>
			<p>“Didn’t he tell you?”</p>
			<p>“He⁠—he just said he thought he’d look me up. Said it was a bit lonely in the evenings. He’s never done such a thing before.”</p>
			<p>“Well, he’s supposed to be pleasant company,” I said, smiling.</p>
			<p>“What does he want to come and see me for? I don’t like it.” His voice rose shrilly. “He spoke of dropping in again. What does it all mean? What idea do you think he has got into his head?”</p>
			<p>“Why should you suppose he has any ulterior motive?” I asked.</p>
			<p>“I don’t like it,” repeated Hawes obstinately. “I’ve never gone against <em>him</em> in any way. I never suggested that <em>he</em> was guilty⁠—even when he accused himself I said it seemed most incomprehensible. If I’ve had suspicions of anybody it’s been of Archer⁠—never of him. Archer is a totally different proposition⁠—a godless irreligious ruffian. A drunken blackguard.”</p>
			<p>“Don’t you think you’re being a little harsh?” I said. “After all, we really know very little about the man.”</p>
			<p>“A poacher, in and out of prison, capable of anything.”</p>
			<p>“Do you really think he shot Colonel Protheroe?” I asked curiously.</p>
			<p>Hawes has an inveterate dislike of answering yes or no. I have noticed it several times lately.</p>
			<p>“Don’t you think yourself, sir, that it’s the only possible solution?”</p>
			<p>“As far as we know,” I said, “there’s no evidence of any kind against him.”</p>
			<p>“His threats,” said Hawes eagerly. “You forget about his threats.”</p>
			<p>I am sick and tired of hearing about Archer’s threats. As far as I can make out, there is no direct evidence that he ever made any.</p>
			<p>“He was determined to be revenged on Colonel Protheroe. He primed himself with drink and then shot him.”</p>
			<p>“That’s pure supposition.”</p>
			<p>“But you will admit that it’s perfectly probable?”</p>
			<p>“No, I don’t.”</p>
			<p>“Possible, then?”</p>
			<p>“Possible, yes.”</p>
			<p>Hawes glanced at me sideways.</p>
			<p>“Why don’t you think it’s probable?”</p>
			<p>“Because,” I said, “a man like Archer wouldn’t think of shooting a man with a pistol. It’s the wrong weapon.”</p>
			<p>Hawes seemed taken aback by my argument. Evidently it wasn’t the objection he had expected.</p>
			<p>“Do you really think the objection is feasible?” he asked doubtingly.</p>
			<p>“To my mind it is a complete stumbling block to Archer’s having committed the crime,” I said.</p>
			<p>In face of my positive assertion, Hawes said no more. He thanked me again and left.</p>
			<p>I had gone as far as the front door with him, and on the hall table I saw four notes. They had certain characteristics in common. The handwriting was almost unmistakably feminine, they all bore the words, “By hand, Urgent,” and the only difference I could see was that one was noticeably dirtier than the rest.</p>
			<p>Their similarity gave me a curious feeling of seeing⁠—not double but quadruple.</p>
			<p>Mary came out of the kitchen and caught me staring at them.</p>
			<p>“Come by hand since lunch time,” she volunteered. “All but one. I found that in the box.”</p>
			<p>I nodded, gathered them up and took them into the study.</p>
			<p>The first one ran thus:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>“Dear Mr. Clement⁠—Something has come to my knowledge which I feel you ought to know. It concerns the death of poor Colonel Protheroe. I should much appreciate your advice on the matter⁠—whether to go to the police or not. Since my dear husband’s death, I have such a shrinking from every kind of publicity. Perhaps you could run in and see me for a few minutes this afternoon.</p>
				<p>Yours sincerely,<br/>
				Martha Price Ridley.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>I opened the second:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>“Dear Mr. Clement⁠—I am so troubled⁠—so <em>exercised</em> in my mind⁠—to know what I ought to do. Something has come to my ears that I feel may be important. I have such a <em>horror</em> of being mixed up with the police in any way. I am so disturbed and distressed. Would it be asking too much of you, dear vicar, to drop in for a few minutes and solve my doubts and perplexities for me in the wonderful way you always do?</p>
				<p>Forgive my troubling you,<br/>
				Yours very sincerely,<br/>
				Caroline Wetherby.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>The third, I felt, I could almost have recited beforehand.</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>“Dear Mr. Clement⁠—Something most important has come to my ears. I feel you should be the first to know about it. Will you call in and see me this afternoon some time? I will wait in for you.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>This militant epistle was signed “Amanda Hartnell.”</p>
			<p>I opened the fourth missive. It has been my good fortune to be troubled with very few anonymous letters. An anonymous letter is, I think, the meanest and cruellest weapon there is. This one was no exception. It purported to be written by an illiterate person, but several things inclined me to disbelieve that assumption.</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>“Dear Vicar⁠—I think you ought to know what is Going On. Your lady has been seen coming out of Mr. Redding’s cottage in a surreptitious manner. You know wot i mean. The two are Carrying On together. i think you ought to know.</p>
				<p>A Friend.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>I made a faint exclamation of disgust and crumpling up the paper tossed it into the open grate just as Griselda entered the room.</p>
			<p>“What’s that you’re throwing down so contemptuously?” she asked.</p>
			<p>“Filth,” I said.</p>
			<p>Taking a match from my pocket, I struck it and bent down. Griselda, however, was too quick for me. She had stooped down and caught up the crumpled ball of paper and smoothed it out before I could stop her.</p>
			<p>She read it, gave a little exclamation of disgust, and tossed it back to me, turning away as she did so. I lighted it and watched it burn.</p>
			<p>Griselda had moved away. She was standing by the window looking out into the garden.</p>
			<p>“Len,” she said, without turning round.</p>
			<p>“Yes, my dear.”</p>
			<p>“I’d like to tell you something. Yes, don’t stop me. I want to, please. When⁠—when Lawrence Redding came here, I let you think that I had only known him slightly before. That wasn’t true. I⁠—had known him rather well. In fact, before I met you, I had been rather in love with him. I think most people are with Lawrence. I was⁠—well, absolutely silly about him at one time. I don’t mean I wrote him compromising letters or anything idiotic like they do in books. But I was rather keen on him once.”</p>
			<p>“Why didn’t you tell me?” I asked.</p>
			<p>“Oh! because! I don’t know exactly except that⁠—well, you’re foolish in some ways. Just because you’re so much older than I am, you think that I⁠—well, that I’m likely to like other people. I thought you’d be tiresome, perhaps, about me and Lawrence being friends.”</p>
			<p>*You’re very clever at concealing things,” I said, remembering what she had told me in that room less than a week ago, and the ingenuous way she had talked.</p>
			<p>“Yes, I’ve always been able to hide things. In a way, I like doing it.”</p>
			<p>Her voice held a childlike ring of pleasure to it.</p>
			<p>“But it’s quite true what I said. I didn’t know about Anne, and I wondered why Lawrence was so different, not⁠—well, really not noticing me. I’m not used to it.”</p>
			<p>There was a pause.</p>
			<p>“You do understand, Len?” said Griselda anxiously.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” I said, “I understand.”</p>
			<p>But did I?</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
