<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-28" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>XXVIII</h2>
			<p>I hurried down the village street. It was eleven o’clock, and at eleven o’clock on a Sunday night the whole village of St. Mary Mead might be dead. I saw, however, a light in a first floor window as I passed, and, realizing that Hawes was still up, I stopped and rang the door bell.</p>
			<p>After what seemed a long time, Hawes’s landlady, Mrs. Sadler, laboriously unfastened two bolts, a chain, and turned a key and peered out at me suspiciously.</p>
			<p>“Why, it’s Vicar!” she exclaimed.</p>
			<p>“Good evening.” I said. “I want to see Mr. Hawes. I see there’s a light in the window, so he’s up still.”</p>
			<p>“That may be. I’ve not seen him since I took up his supper. He’s had a quiet evening⁠—no one to see him, and he’s not been out.”</p>
			<p>I nodded, and passing her, went quickly up the stairs. Hawes has a bedroom and sitting-room on the first floor.</p>
			<p>I passed into the latter. Hawes was lying back in a long chair asleep. My entrance did not wake him. An empty cachet box and a glass of water, half-full, stood beside him.</p>
			<p>On the floor, by his left foot, was a crumpled sheet of paper with writing on it. I picked it up and straightened it out.</p>
			<p>It began: “<em>My dear Clement⁠—</em>”</p>
			<p>I read it through, uttered an exclamation and shoved it into my pocket. Then I bent over Hawes and studied him attentively.</p>
			<p>Next, reaching for the telephone which stood by his elbow, I gave the number of the Vicarage. Melchett must have been still trying to trace the call, for I was told that the number was engaged. Asking them to call me, I put the instrument down again.</p>
			<p>I put my hand into my pocket to look at the paper I had picked up once more. With it, I drew out the note that I had found in the letter box and which was still unopened.</p>
			<p>Its appearance was horribly familiar. It was the same handwriting as the anonymous letter that had come that afternoon.</p>
			<p>I tore it open.</p>
			<p>I read it once⁠—twice⁠—unable to realize its contents.</p>
			<p>I was beginning to read it a third time when the telephone rang. Like a man in a dream I picked up the receiver and spoke.</p>
			<p>“Hullo?”</p>
			<p>“Hullo.”</p>
			<p>“Is that you, Melchett?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, where are you? I’ve traced that call. The number is⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I know the number.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, good! Is that where you are speaking from?”</p>
			<p>“Yes.”</p>
			<p>“What about that confession?”</p>
			<p>“I’ve got the confession all right.”</p>
			<p>“You mean you’ve got the murderer?”</p>
			<p>I had then the strongest temptation of my life. I looked at Hawes. I looked at the crumpled letter. I looked at the anonymous scrawl. I looked at the empty cachet box with the name of Cherubim on it. I remembered a certain casual conversation.</p>
			<p>I made an immense effort.</p>
			<p>“I⁠—don’t know,” I said. “You’d better come round.”</p>
			<p>And I gave him the address.</p>
			<p>Then I sat down in the chair opposite Hawes to think.</p>
			<p>I had two clear minutes to do so.</p>
			<p>In two minutes’ times, Melchett would have arrived.</p>
			<p>I took up the anonymous letter and read it through again for the third time.</p>
			<p>Then I closed my eyes and thought⁠ ⁠…</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
