<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-17" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</h2>
			<p>Inspector Slack came round to see me the following morning. He is, I think, thawing towards me. In time, he may forget the incident of the clock.</p>
			<p>“Well, sir,” he greeted me. “I’ve traced that telephone call that you received.”</p>
			<p>“Indeed?” I said eagerly.</p>
			<p>“It’s rather odd. It was put through from the North Lodge of Old Hall. Now that lodge is empty, the lodgekeepers have been pensioned off and the next lodgekeepers aren’t in yet. The place was empty and convenient⁠—a window at the back was open. No fingerprints on the instrument itself⁠—it had been wiped clear. That’s suggestive.”</p>
			<p>“How do you mean?”</p>
			<p>“I mean that it shows that call was put through deliberately to get you out of the way. Therefore the murder was carefully planned in advance. If it had been just a harmless practical joke, the fingerprints wouldn’t have been wiped off so carefully.”</p>
			<p>“No. I see that.”</p>
			<p>“It also shows that the murderer was well acquainted with Old Hall and its surroundings. It wasn’t <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Protheroe who put that call through. I’ve accounted for every moment of her time that afternoon. There are half a dozen other servants who can swear that she was at home till five-thirty. Then the car came round and drove Colonel Protheroe and her to the village. The colonel went to see Quinton, the vet, about one of the horses. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Protheroe did some ordering at the grocers and at the fish shop, and from there came straight down the back lane where Miss Marple saw her. All the shops agree she carried no handbag with her. The old lady was right.”</p>
			<p>“She usually is,” I said mildly.</p>
			<p>“And Miss Protheroe was over at Much Benham at 5:30.”</p>
			<p>“Quite so,” I said. “My nephew was there too.”</p>
			<p>“That disposes of her. The maid seems all right⁠—a bit hysterical and upset, but what can you expect? Of course, I’ve got my eye on the butler⁠—what with giving notice and all. But I don’t think he knows anything about it.”</p>
			<p>“Your inquiries seem to have had rather a negative result, inspector.”</p>
			<p>“They do and they do not, sir. There’s one very queer thing has turned up⁠—quite unexpectedly, I may say.”</p>
			<p>“Yes?”</p>
			<p>“You remember the fuss that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Price Ridley, who lives next door to you, was kicking up yesterday morning? About being rung up on the telephone?”</p>
			<p>“Yes?” I said.</p>
			<p>“Well, we traced the call just to calm her⁠—and where on this earth do you think it was put through from?”</p>
			<p>“A call office?” I hazarded.</p>
			<p>“No, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Clement. That call was put through from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lawrence Redding’s cottage.”</p>
			<p>“What?” I exclaimed, surprised.</p>
			<p>“Yes. A bit odd, isn’t it? <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Redding had nothing to do with it. At that time, 6:30, he was on his way to the Blue Boar with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Stone in full view of the village. But there it is. Suggestive, eh? Someone walked into that empty cottage and used the telephone, who was it? That’s two queer telephone calls in one day. Makes you think there’s some connection between them. I’ll eat my hat if they weren’t both put through by the same person.”</p>
			<p>“But with what object?”</p>
			<p>“Well, that’s what we’ve got to find out. There seems no particular point in the second one, but there must be a point somewhere. And you see the significance? <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Redding’s house used to telephone from. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Redding’s pistol. All throwing suspicion on <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Redding.”</p>
			<p>“It would be more to the point to have put through the <em>first</em> call from his house,” I objected.</p>
			<p>“Ah, but I’ve been thinking that out. What did <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Redding do most afternoons? He went up to Old Hall and painted Miss Protheroe. And from his cottage he’d go on his motor bicycle, passing through the North Gate. Now you see the point of the call being put through from there. <em>The murderer is someone who didn’t know about the quarrel and that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Redding wasn’t going up to Old Hall any more.</em>”</p>
			<p>I reflected a moment to let the inspector’s points sink into my brain. They seemed to me logical and unavoidable.</p>
			<p>“Were there any fingerprints on the receiver in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Redding’s cottage?” I asked.</p>
			<p>“There were not,” said the inspector bitterly. “That dratted old woman who goes and does for him had been and dusted them off yesterday morning.” He reflected wrathfully for a few minutes. “She’s a stupid old fool, anyway. Can’t remember when she saw the pistol last. It might have been there on the morning of the crime, or it might not. ‘She couldn’t say, she’s sure.’ They’re all alike!</p>
			<p>“Just as a matter of form, I went round and saw <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Stone,” he went on. “I must say he was pleasant as could be about it. He and Miss Cram went up to that mound⁠—or barrow⁠—or whatever you call it, about half-past two yesterday, and stayed there all the afternoon. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Stone came back alone, and she came later. He says he didn’t hear any shot, but admits he’s absentminded. But it all bears out what we think.”</p>
			<p>“Only,” I said, “you haven’t caught the murderer.”</p>
			<p>“H’m,” said the inspector. “It was a woman’s voice you heard through the telephone. It was in all probability a woman’s voice <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Price Ridley heard. If only that shot hadn’t come hard on the close of the telephone call⁠—well, I’d know where to look.”</p>
			<p>“Where?”</p>
			<p>“Ah! That’s just what it’s best not to say, sir.”</p>
			<p>Unblushingly, I suggested a glass of old port. I have some very fine old vintage port. Eleven o’clock in the morning is not the usual time for drinking port, but I did not think that mattered with Inspector Slack. It was, of course, cruel abuse of the vintage port, but one must not be squeamish about such things.</p>
			<p>When Inspector Slack had polished off the second glass, he began to unbend and become genial. Such is the effect of that particular port.</p>
			<p>“I don’t suppose it matters with you, sir,” he said. “You’ll keep it to yourself? No letting it get round the parish.”</p>
			<p>I reassured him.</p>
			<p>“Seeing as the whole thing happened in your house, it almost seems as though you have a right to know.”</p>
			<p>“Just what I feel myself,” I said.</p>
			<p>“Well, then, sir, what about the lady who called on Colonel Protheroe the night before the murder?”</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lestrange,” I cried, speaking rather loud in my astonishment.</p>
			<p>The inspector threw me a reproachful glance.</p>
			<p>“Not so loud, sir. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lestrange is the lady I’ve got as eye on. You remember what I told you⁠—blackmail.”</p>
			<p>“Hardly a reason for murder. Wouldn’t it be a case of killing the goose that laid the golden eggs? That is, assuming that your hypothesis is true, which I don’t for a minute admit.”</p>
			<p>The inspector winked at me in a common manner.</p>
			<p>“Ah! She’s the kind the gentlemen will always stand up for. Now look here, sir. Suppose she’s successfully blackmailed the old gentleman in the past. After a lapse of years, she gets wind of him, comes down here and tries it on again. <em>But</em>, in the meantime, things have changed. The law has taken up a very different stand. Every facility is given nowadays to people prosecuting for blackmail⁠—names are not allowed to be reported in the press. Suppose Colonel Protheroe turns round and says he’ll have the law on her. She’s in a nasty position. They give a very severe sentence for blackmail. The boot’s on the other leg. The only thing to do to save herself is to put him out good and quick.”</p>
			<p>I was silent. I had to admit that the case the inspector had built up was plausible. Only one thing to my mind made it inadmissable⁠—the personality of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lestrange.</p>
			<p>“I don’t agree with you, inspector,” I said. “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lestrange doesn’t seem to me to be a potential blackmailer. She’s⁠—well, it’s an old-fashioned word, but she’s a⁠—lady.”</p>
			<p>He threw me a pitying glance.</p>
			<p>“Ah! well, sir,” he said tolerantly, “you’re a clergyman. You don’t know half of what goes on. Lady indeed! You’d be surprised if you knew some of the things I know.”</p>
			<p>“I’m not referring to mere social position. Anyway, I should imagine <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lestrange to be a <i xml:lang="fr">déclassée</i>. What I mean is a question of⁠—personal refinement.”</p>
			<p>“You don’t see her with the same eyes as I do, sir. I may be a man⁠—but I’m a police officer, too. They can’t get over me with their personal refinement. Why, that woman is the kind who could stick a knife into you without turning a hair.”</p>
			<p>Curiously enough, I could believe <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lestrange guilty of murder much more easily that I could believe her capable of blackmail.</p>
			<p>“But, of course, she can’t have been telephoning to the old lady next door and shooting Colonel Protheroe at one and the same time,” continued the inspector.</p>
			<p>The words were hardly out of his mouth when he slapped his leg ferociously.</p>
			<p>“Got it,” he exclaimed. “That’s the point of the telephone call. Kind of <em>alibi</em>. Knew we’d connect it with the first one. I’m going to look into this. She may have bribed some village lad to do the phoning for her. <em>He’d</em> never think of connecting it with the murder.”</p>
			<p>The inspector hurried off.</p>
			<p>“Miss Marple wants to see you,” said Griselda, putting her head in. “She sent over a very incoherent note⁠—all spidery and underlined. I couldn’t read most of it. Apparently she can’t leave home herself. Hurry up and go across and see her and find out what it is. I’ve got my old women coming in two minutes or I’d come myself. I do hate old women⁠—they tell you about their bad legs and sometimes insist on showing them to you. What luck that the inquest is this afternoon! You won’t have to go and watch the Boys’ Club Cricket Match.”</p>
			<p>I hurried off, considerably exercised in my mind as to the reason for this summons.</p>
			<p>I found Miss Marple in what, I believe, is described as a fluster. She was very pink and slightly incoherent.</p>
			<p>“My nephew,” she explained. “My nephew, Raymond West, the author. He is coming down today. Such a to-do. I have to see to everything myself. You cannot trust a maid to air a bed properly, and we must, of course, have a meat meal tonight. Gentlemen require such a lot of meat, do they not? And drink. There certainly should be some drink in the house⁠—and a siphon.”</p>
			<p>“If I can do anything⁠—” I began.</p>
			<p>“Oh! How very kind. But I did not mean that. There is plenty of time really. He brings his own pipe and tobacco, I am glad to say. Glad because it saves me from knowing which kind of cigarettes are right to buy. But rather sorry, too, because it takes so long for the smell to get out of the curtains. Of course, I open the window and shake them well very early every morning. Raymond gets up very late⁠—I think writers often do. He writes very clever books, I believe, though people are not really nearly so unpleasant as he makes out. Clever young men know so little of life, don’t you think?”</p>
			<p>“Would you like to bring him to dinner at the Vicarage?” I asked, still unable to gather why I had been summoned.</p>
			<p>“Oh! No, thank you,” said Miss Marple. “It’s very kind of you,” she added.</p>
			<p>“There was⁠—er⁠—something you wanted to see me about, I think,” I suggested desperately.</p>
			<p>“Oh! Of course. In all the excitement it had gone right out of my head.” She broke off and called to her maid. “Emily⁠—Emily. Not those sheets. The frilled ones with the monogram, and don’t put them too near the fire.”</p>
			<p>She closed the door and returned to me on tiptoe.</p>
			<p>“It’s just rather a curious thing that happened last night,” she explained. “I thought you would like to hear about it, though at the moment it doesn’t seem to make sense. I felt very wakeful last night⁠—wondering about all this sad business. And I got up and looked out of my window. And what do you think I saw?”</p>
			<p>I looked, inquiring.</p>
			<p>“Gladys Cram,” said Miss Marple, with great emphasis. “As I live, going into the wood with a suitcase.”</p>
			<p>“A suitcase?”</p>
			<p>“Isn’t it extraordinary? What should she want with a suitcase in the wood at twelve o’clock at night?”</p>
			<p>We both stared at each other.</p>
			<p>“You see,” said Miss Marple, “I dare say it has nothing to do with the murder. But it is a Peculiar Thing. And just at present we all feel we must take notice of Peculiar Things.”</p>
			<p>“Perfectly amazing,” I said. ‘Was she going to⁠—er⁠—sleep in the barrow by any chance?”</p>
			<p>“She didn’t, at any rate,” said Miss Marple. “Because quite a short time afterwards she came back, and she hadn’t got the suitcase with her.”</p>
			<p>We stared at each other again.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
