<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-19" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</h2>
			<p>‚ÄúVery glad to have met you,‚Äù said Lawrence. ‚ÄúCome to my place.‚Äù</p>
			<p>We turned in at the little rustic gate, went up the path, and he drew a key from his pocket and inserted it in the lock.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou keep the door locked now,‚Äù I observed.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes.‚Äù He laughed rather bitterly. ‚ÄúCase of stable door when the steed is gone, eh? It is rather like that. You know, padre,‚Äù he held the door open and I passed inside, ‚Äúthere‚Äôs something about all this business that I don‚Äôt like. It‚Äôs too much of‚ÅÝ‚Äîhow shall I put it‚ÅÝ‚Äîan inside job. Someone knew about that pistol of mine. That means that the murderer, whoever he was, must have actually been in this house‚ÅÝ‚Äîperhaps even had a drink with me.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNot necessarily,‚Äù I objected. ‚ÄúThe whole village of <abbr>St.</abbr>¬ÝMary Mead probably knows exactly where you keep your toothbrush and what kind of tooth powder you use.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut why should it interest them?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI don‚Äôt know,‚Äù I said, ‚Äúbut it does. If you change your shaving cream it will be a topic of conversation.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThey must be very hard up for news.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThey are. Nothing exciting ever happens here.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, it has now‚ÅÝ‚Äîwith a vengeance.‚Äù</p>
			<p>I agreed.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd who tells them all these things anyway? Shaving cream and things like that?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúProbably old <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝArcher.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat old crone? She‚Äôs practically a half-wit, as far as I can make out.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat‚Äôs merely the camouflage of the poor,‚Äù I explained. ‚ÄúThey take refuge behind a mask of stupidity. You‚Äôll probably find that the old lady has all her wits about her. By the way, she seems very certain now that the pistol was in its proper place midday Thursday. What‚Äôs made her so positive all of a sudden?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI haven‚Äôt the least idea.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDo you think she‚Äôs right?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThere again I haven‚Äôt the least idea. I don‚Äôt go round taking an inventory of my possessions every day.‚Äù</p>
			<p>I looked round the small living-room. Every shelf and table was littered with miscellaneous articles. Lawrence lived in the midst of an artistic disarray that would have driven me quite mad.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt‚Äôs a bit of a job finding things sometimes,‚Äù he said, observing my glance. ‚ÄúOn the other hand, everything is handy‚ÅÝ‚Äînot tucked away.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNothing is tucked away, certainly,‚Äù I agreed. ‚ÄúIt might perhaps have been better if the pistol had been.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDo you know I rather expected the coroner to say something of the sort. Coroners are such asses. I expected to be censured or whatever they call it.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBy the way,‚Äù I asked, ‚Äúwas it loaded?‚Äù</p>
			<p>Lawrence shook his head.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôm not quite so careless as that. It was unloaded, but there was a box of cartridges beside it.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt was apparently loaded in all six chambers and one shot had been fired.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Lawrence nodded.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd whose hand fired it? It‚Äôs all very well, sir, but unless the real murderer is discovered, I shall be suspected of the crime to the day of my death.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDon‚Äôt say that, my boy.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut I do say it.‚Äù</p>
			<p>He became silent, frowning to himself. He roused himself at last and said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut let me tell you how I got on last night. You know, old Miss Marple knows a thing or two.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúShe is, I believe, rather unpopular on that account.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Lawrence proceeded to recount his story.</p>
			<p>He had, following Miss Marple‚Äôs advice, gone up to Old Hall. There, with Anne‚Äôs assistance, he had had an interview with the parlourmaid.</p>
			<p>Anne had said simply:</p>
			<p>‚Äú<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝRedding wants to ask you a few questions, Rose.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Then she had left the room.</p>
			<p>Lawrence had felt somewhat nervous. Rose, a pretty girl of twenty-five, gazed at him with a limpid gaze which he found rather disconcerting.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt‚Äôs‚ÅÝ‚Äîit‚Äôs about Colonel Protheroe‚Äôs death.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes, sir.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôm very anxious, you see, to get at the truth.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes, sir.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI feel that there may be‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat someone might‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat there might be some incident‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>At this point Lawrence felt that he was not covering himself with glory, and heartily cursed Miss Marple and her suggestions.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI wondered if you could help me?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes, sir?‚Äù</p>
			<p>Rose‚Äôs demeanour was still that of the perfect servant, polite, anxious to assist, and completely uninterested.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDash it all,‚Äù said Lawrence, ‚Äúhaven‚Äôt you talked the thing over in the servants‚Äô hall?‚Äù</p>
			<p>This method of attack flustered Rose slightly. Her perfect poise was shaken.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIn the servants‚Äô hall, sir?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOr the housekeeper‚Äôs room, or the bootboy‚Äôs dugout, or wherever you do talk? There must be some place.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Rose displayed a very faint disposition to giggle, and Lawrence felt encouraged.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúLook here, Rose, you‚Äôre an awfully nice girl. I‚Äôm sure you must understand what I‚Äôm feeling like. I don‚Äôt want to be hanged. I didn‚Äôt murder your master, but a lot of people think I did. Can‚Äôt you help me in any way?‚Äù</p>
			<p>I can imagine at this point that Lawrence must have looked extremely appealing. His handsome head thrown back, his Irish blue eyes appealing. Rose softened and capitulated.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, sir! I‚Äôm sure‚ÅÝ‚Äîif any of us could help in any way. None of us think you did it, sir. Indeed we don‚Äôt.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI know, my dear girl, but that‚Äôs not going to help me with the police.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThe police!‚Äù Rose tossed her head. ‚ÄúI can tell you, sir, we don‚Äôt think much of that inspector. Slack, he calls himself. The police indeed.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAll the same, the police are very powerful. Now, Rose, you say you‚Äôll do your best to help me. I can‚Äôt help feeling that there‚Äôs a lot we haven‚Äôt got at yet. The lady, for instance, who called to see Colonel Protheroe the night before he died.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚Äú<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝLestrange?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝLestrange. I can‚Äôt help feeling there‚Äôs something rather odd about that visit of hers.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes, indeed, sir, that‚Äôs what we all said.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou did?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúComing the way she did. And asking for the colonel. And of course there‚Äôs been a lot of talk‚ÅÝ‚Äînobody knowing anything about her down here. And <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSimmons, she‚Äôs the housekeeper, sir, she gave it as her opinion that she was a regular bad lot. But after hearing what Gladdie said, well, I didn‚Äôt know what to think.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat did Gladdie say?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, nothing, sir! It was just‚ÅÝ‚Äîwe were talking, you know.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Lawrence looked at her. He had the feeling of something kept back.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI wonder very much what her interview with Colonel Protheroe was about.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes, sir.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI believe you know, Rose?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMe? Oh, no, sir! Indeed I don‚Äôt. How could I?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúLook here, Rose. You said you‚Äôd help me. If you overheard anything, anything at all‚ÅÝ‚Äîit mightn‚Äôt seem important, but anything‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I‚Äôd be so awfully grateful to you. After all, anyone might‚ÅÝ‚Äîmight chance‚ÅÝ‚Äîjust <em>chance</em> to overhear something.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut I didn‚Äôt, sir, really, I didn‚Äôt.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThen somebody else did,‚Äù said Lawrence acutely.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, sir‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDo tell me, Rose.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI don‚Äôt know what Gladdie would say, I‚Äôm sure.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúShe‚Äôd want you to tell me. Who is Gladdie, by the way?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúShe‚Äôs the kitchenmaid, sir. And you see, she‚Äôd just stepped out to speak to a friend, and she was passing the window‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe study window‚ÅÝ‚Äîand the master was there with the lady. And of course he did speak very loud, the master did, always. And naturally, feeling a little curious‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI mean‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAwfully natural,‚Äù said Lawrence, ‚ÄúI mean one would simply have to listen.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut of course she didn‚Äôt tell anyone‚ÅÝ‚Äîexcept me. And we both thought it very odd. But Gladdie couldn‚Äôt say anything, you see, because if it was known she‚Äôd gone out to meet a‚ÅÝ‚Äîa friend‚ÅÝ‚Äîwell, it would have meant a lot of unpleasantness with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPratt, that‚Äôs the cook, sir. But I‚Äôm sure she‚Äôd tell you anything, sir, willing.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, can I go to the kitchen and speak to her?‚Äù</p>
			<p>Rose was horrified by the suggestion.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, no, sir, that would never do! And Gladdie‚Äôs a very nervous girl anyway.‚Äù</p>
			<p>At last the matter was settled, after a lot of discussion over difficult points. A clandestine meeting was arranged in the shrubbery.</p>
			<p>Here, in due course, Lawrence was confronted by the nervous Gladdie who he described as more like a shivering rabbit than anything human. Ten minutes were spent in trying to put the girl at her ease, the shivering Gladys explaining that she couldn‚Äôt ever‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat she didn‚Äôt ought, that she didn‚Äôt think Rose would have given her away, that anyway she hadn‚Äôt meant no harm, indeed she hadn‚Äôt, and that she‚Äôd catch it badly if <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPratt ever came to hear of it.</p>
			<p>Lawrence reassured, cajoled, persuaded‚ÅÝ‚Äîat last Gladys consented to speak.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIf you‚Äôll be sure it‚Äôll go no further, sir.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOf course it won‚Äôt.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd it won‚Äôt be brought up against me in a court of law?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNever.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd you won‚Äôt tell the mistress?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNot on any account.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIf it were to get to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPratt‚Äôs ears‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt won‚Äôt. Now tell me, Gladys.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIf you‚Äôre sure it‚Äôs all right?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOf course it is. You‚Äôll be glad some day you‚Äôve saved me from being hanged.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Gladys gave a little shriek.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh! Indeed, I wouldn‚Äôt like that, sir. Well, it‚Äôs very little I heard‚ÅÝ‚Äîand that entirely by accident as you might say‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI quite understand.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut the master, he was evidently very angry. ‚ÄòAfter all these years‚Äô‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat‚Äôs what he was saying‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äòyou dare to come here‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äô ‚ÄòIt‚Äôs an outrage‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äô I couldn‚Äôt hear what the lady said‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut after a bit he said, ‚ÄòI utterly refuse‚ÅÝ‚Äîutterly‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äô I can‚Äôt remember everything‚ÅÝ‚Äîseemed as though they were at it hammer and tongs, she wanting him to do something and he refusing. ‚ÄòIt‚Äôs a disgrace that you should have come down here,‚Äô that‚Äôs one thing he said. And ‚ÄòYou shall not see her‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI forbid it‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äô and that made me prick up my ears. Looked as though the lady wanted to tell <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝProtheroe a thing or two, and he was afraid about it. And I thought to myself, ‚ÄòWell, now, fancy the master. Him so particular. And maybe no beauty himself when all‚Äôs said and done. Fancy!‚Äô I said. And ‚ÄòMen are all alike,‚Äô I said to my friend later. Not that he‚Äôd agree. Argued, he did. But he did admit he was surprised at Colonel Protheroe‚ÅÝ‚Äîhim being a churchwarden and handing round the plate and reading the lessons on Sundays. ‚ÄòBut there,‚Äô I said, ‚Äòthat‚Äôs very often the worst.‚Äô For that‚Äôs what I‚Äôve heard my mother say, many a time.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Gladdie paused out of breath, and Lawrence tried tactfully to get back to where the conversation had started.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDid you hear anything else?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, it‚Äôs difficult to remember exactly, sir. It was all much the same. He said once or twice, ‚ÄòI don‚Äôt believe it.‚Äô Just like that. ‚ÄòWhatever Haydock says, I don‚Äôt believe it.‚Äô‚Ää‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHe said that, did he? ‚ÄòWhatever Haydock says?‚Äô‚Ää‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes. And he said it was all a plot.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou didn‚Äôt hear the lady speak at all?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOnly just at the end. She must have got up to go and come nearer the window. And I heard what she said. Made my blood run cold, it did. I‚Äôll never forget it. ‚Äò<em>By this time tomorrow night, you may be dead</em>,‚Äô she said. Wicked the way she said it. As soon as I heard the news, ‚ÄòThere,‚Äô I said to Rose. ‚ÄòThere!‚Äô‚Ää‚Äù</p>
			<p>Lawrence wondered. Principally he wondered how much of Gladys‚Äôs story was to be depended upon. True in the main, he suspected that it had been embellished and polished since the murder. In especial he doubted the accuracy of the last remark. He thought it highly possible that it owed its being to the fact of the murder.</p>
			<p>He thanked Gladys, rewarded her suitably, reassured her as to her misdoings being made known to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPratt, and left Old Hall with a good deal to think over.</p>
			<p>One thing was clear, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝLestrange‚Äôs interview with Colonel Protheroe had certainly not been a peaceful one, and it was one which he was anxious to keep from the knowledge of his wife.</p>
			<p>I thought of Miss Marple‚Äôs churchwarden with his separate establishment. Was this a case resembling that?</p>
			<p>I wondered more than ever where Haydock came in? He had saved <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝLestrange from having to give evidence at the inquest. He had done his best to protect her from the police.</p>
			<p>How far would he carry that protection?</p>
			<p>Supposing he suspected her of crime‚ÅÝ‚Äîwould he still try and shield her?</p>
			<p>She was a curious woman‚ÅÝ‚Äîa woman of very strong magnetic charm. I myself hated the thought of connecting her with the crime in any way.</p>
			<p>Something in me said, ‚ÄúIt can‚Äôt be her!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Why?</p>
			<p>And an imp in my brain replied: ‚ÄúBecause she‚Äôs a very beautiful and attractive woman. That‚Äôs why.‚Äù</p>
			<p>There is, as Miss Marple would say, a lot of human nature in all of us.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
