<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>List of Illustrations</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<nav id="loi" epub:type="loi">
			<h2 epub:type="title">List of Illustrations</h2>
			<ol>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-3.xhtml#illustration-1">Plan A is the narrator’s sketch of the Vicarage and its walled garden, shown at the left end of a lane, above which is Miss Marple’s house, so neighboring the Vicarage to the right. A path opposite Miss Marple’s runs down towards the Old Hall with woods to the left. A studio is in the lower right corner of the Vicarage garden, visible from Miss Marple’s gate on the lane.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-5.xhtml#illustration-2">Plan B shows the arrangement of the Vicar’s study: a door enters on the lower left of the oblong room. On the shorter left-hand wall is a fireplace, surrounded by a sofa, two armchairs, and a side table with a lamp; beside the side table is a window on the wall opposite the door. Beside the window to the right is a tall stand with a pot on it, to the right of that a side chair, and the writing-table is in the upper right corner, sitting diagonally. Beside it on the shorter right-hand wall is a bookshelf, and a tallboy chest of drawers is in the lower right corner. Between the tallboy and the door are two side chairs.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-9.xhtml#illustration-3">Plan C shows a map of St. Mary Mead; the compass points are set as an “X,” with North pointing to the upper left. A long street runs from left to right: at the left end is the train station opposite Laurence Reddy’s cottage. Moving right on the upper side of this street are shops and small houses before a crossroads, with the church on one corner, and the Blue Boar on the far corner. On the lower side of the street, Mrs. Lestrange’s cottage is at the corner of lane; on the opposite corner there are more shops, then come the homes of Miss Marple, Miss Hartnell, and Miss Wetherby, with Miss Wetherby’s opposite the church. Each house is bounded by the main street on one side, and the Vicarage lane on the other. The map shows Dr. Haydock’s house immediately next door to Miss Marple’s, behind the shops and above the Vicarage, while Mrs. Price Ridley’s home is on the far side of and below the Vicarage.</a>
					</p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</nav>
	</body>
</html>
